Welcome back to Movie Recapped. Today
I will show you an action, drama,
horror film from 2016, titled The Thinning.
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
In the near future, the U.N. requires countries
to cut their population by 5% every year in
order to combat overpopulation. America gives
its students a standardized test every year,
and executes the students with the lowest scores.
The test is called the 10-241 or The Thinning.
In Austin Texas, students prepare for the
Thinning, which takes place in 18 hours.
Simon and his older sister, Laina, sit at a
desk in his room as Laina tries to mentor him.
Their younger siblings, Corrine and
Joey sit on the bed playing games.
Even with Laina’s help, Simon gets frustrated
and says he can’t learn enough before the test.
He asks Laina for something and gives her money
in exchange for a contact lens that he can use
to cheat. When he tries it on, it displays the
answers to the math problems in his notebook.
She reminds him that he has to destroy it after
the test. Laina then receives a call from Dr.
Perkash, who tells her that her mom had been
trying to get discharged from the hospital against
medical advice. She asks the doctor to stall her
mom and tells her siblings that they have to go.
At the hospital, Laina intercepts her mom signing
herself out. The doctor pulls Laina aside and
reveals that her mom is only getting worse. Even
though they can’t treat her if she goes home,
he explains that making her comfortable might be
the most they can do for her. At the Governor’s
mansion, just 12 hours until the Thinning, Blake
passes a few bodyguards in the hallway. He offers
to get them something from the kitchen, but they
decline. Instead, Blake sneaks out of the house to
his car where he finds his girlfriend, Ellie. She
startles him, and jokes that the same trick always
works on him. When Blake insists that this time
would be the last, they sober, remembering the
next day’s test. Ellie refuses to talk about it
and instead decides to show him something that she
insists is secret. She leads him to the Bilski’s
mansion, where they strip and swim in the pool.
Afterwards, they kiss in the car until Ellie
admits that she’s scared about the test.
Then Vince, one of the bodyguards, catches them
and brings Blake back to his dad. Blake’s dad,
Governor Redding, lectures his son and tells him
that while it’s okay to have fun, that he has to
pick better moments. He insists that Ellie is a
distraction that Blake can’t afford until he gets
through tomorrow’s test, and his final test next
year. After that, Blake can be distracted for the
rest of his life. Governor Redding gives Blake a
hug before he leaves the room. Three hours before
the Thinning, guards patrol a militaristic
school surrounded in chain-link fences,
barbed wire, and cameras. Students approach the
facility, watched by guards in black masks. Simon
bumps into another student, drops his contact
lens, and is unable to find it. The guard orders
him to keep moving. Blake approaches Laina as she
watches students saying goodbye to their parents.
He asks for a study guide but she explains that
she gave the last one away. Kellan, her friend,
asks about Blake, but she insists that she barely
knows him. The guards check students for cheating
devices, and when one guilty student is discovered
they chase him down and catch him with a net.
Kellan uses his dad’s security access to
view the security footage and sends it to
a reporter he claims to know, named Wendy
Banks. He explains that he has her email,
though she doesn’t seem to respond to his tips.
Inside the school, Blake tries to comfort Ellie.
Fifteen minutes before the test begins, the guards
lock down the school. The students gather in their
classrooms and teachers review the rules. Miss
Birch tells her students that she’s proud of them,
and that the questions are tough but not meant to
trick them. She also insists that there’s always a
chance. A second teacher, Mr. Glass also goes over
the rules and reminds the students that the test
is an accurate aptitude assessment. He then orders
them to begin and the lights in the classroom dim.
Each student picks up a tablet and begins to take
the test with the tablets lighting up their faces.
The teachers warn the students when they have a
minute remaining, then announce the end of the
test. As the students wait for their results, some
show signs of stress. They squirm in their seats,
cry, or look uncomfortable. Kellan is
amongst them. Eventually, names of the
students who failed are read out. With each name
called, a student is removed. Some cooperate,
some beg, others require force. Kellan is
relieved that he passed, but Ellie fails.
The remaining students are congratulated
for passing and released to the rec room.
Laina sees Simon being led away with the failed
students and Blake calls his dad to beg for him to
do something to save Ellie. But, his dad insists
that he has to obey the law. Blake gets angry and
slams the locker. He runs after them and attacks
a guard with a fire extinguisher. He tells Ellie
to run as the guards are distracted, but she is
stopped by the crowd and caught. One year later,
the next test is 24 hours away. Laina sits at
a table with her two younger siblings, they’re
surrounded by boxes and one holds a pamphlet
that shows that her mother has passed away.
Miss Birch visits to bring the family some extra
casserole and tries to comfort Laina about the
fact that Corrine would be taking her first
test. Meanwhile, Blake works out in his room.
He still has a picture of Ellie pinned to his
wall. He begins to record a video on a tablet,
saying that if someone was watching it, he would
already be dead. Three hours before the test,
Laina quizzes Corrine as they approach the school
and hugs her before sending her inside. Governor
Redding discusses plans for an announcement with
Vince, checking that everything is ready. Then, he
checks in with Blake. He tries to convince Blake
that nothing could be done about Ellie, but Blake
dismisses him. Blake leaves for school and Vince
sees him put a package in a mailbox along the way.
Laina and Kellan meet up at the school and talk
about the fact that this is their last test.
Kellan admits that he is nervous but recognizes
that Laina probably isn’t because of how smart she
is. Instead, she’s more nervous about Corrine than
herself. On the way inside, Kellan runs into Wade,
a quarterback that goes on to bully another kid.
They wonder if he’s actually smart enough to have
survived this long. Fifteen minutes before
the test, the school is locked down again.
At the mansion, Vince approaches Governor Redding
about his son and shows him the package Blake had
tried to deliver. Inside is Blake’s tablet
where he recorded a video explaining his
plan to intentionally fail the test. In the
video he explains that if his dad wants to
stand by this system, he’d have to stand by the
system that killed his son. The Governor demands
for his son to be brought home, but the school is
locked down and he throws a chair in frustration.
Then he tells the other bodyguard to
leave the room. Back at the facility,
Blake waits to take his test and a dark-haired
girl named Sarah looks at Mr. Glass.
She’d slept with him to try to get a
passing score. He doesn’t meet her gaze.
In a classroom of younger kids, Miss Cole shows
her students a video before their first test.
The video is created by a company called Assuru
Global and consists of a cartoon Earth explaining
why the test had been implemented, as a way to
deal with overpopulation. It lists how some other
countries killed their elderly or restricted the
amount of children a couple could have, but that
America only lets the smart kids live there,
allowing it to become the best country again.
The video portrays the kids that fail the test
as merely helping the planet to feel better.
Miss Cole steps outside to take a minute for
herself, a guard tells her that someone else
can give the test if she’s not up for it,
but she declines the offer. She returns to
the classroom as the kids finish the video and
clap. She directs them to take the exciting test
they’d been practicing for. The older students
also start the test. From the control room,
Mason King watches over them and receives a call,
which he answers. Blake finishes his test early in
the classroom and Mr. Glass notices. Amongst the
smaller kids, Nathan raises his hand for help on
a question but Miss Cole isn’t allowed to help him
so she tells him to do his best. Once the test is
finished, Miss Cole tells the students to stand
up and follow the leader if their name is called.
The teachers read out the names of the
failed students. Among them are Nathan,
Sarah, and Laina, but not Blake. Mason calls the
Mayor to confirm that the transfer was successful
and that Blake is safe. The mayor then approves
the commencement of the Thinning. Blake watches
as the failed kids are sent down the hall. Miss
Birch runs to intercept a guard and insists that
Laina is the best student she’s had and that
she can’t believe that Laina could’ve failed.
The guard checks with his superiors, but they
insist that there’s no problem and he’s told to
send Laina off. The teacher holds onto Laina for a
moment and slips her a keycard, reminding her that
there’s always a chance and telling her to get
away. In the rec room, students are congratulated
for making it. They eat and dance to music.
Miss Birch spots Mr. Glass flirting with another
dark-haired student. Elsewhere, Governor Redding
takes steps on stage for a big announcement.
He starts by talking about all the ways he’s
improved things during his time as Governor.
He talks about the difficult but necessary
decisions that had to be made. At the school,
his speech plays on a TV at the party. Blake
sees it and leaves. As the Governor continues
to discuss how the Thinning is not a barbaric
practice, but is instead leading in innovation and
an effort to make the population the best it can
be, the failed kids are being led down a hallway.
They are instructed to take off their clothes
and to prepare for decontamination. Laina slips
the keycard into her mouth to hide it. As Blake
begins to make his way through the hallways of
the school, his dad announces his candidacy for
president. The failed kids are given new clothes,
then led to a room with a few rows of chairs. They
are each cuffed to a chair and the surrounding
guards draw syringes. Some of the kids begin to
panic. In the hallway, Blake acts hurt to lure
a guard towards him then knocks him out. Then,
he makes his way to the control room and sneaks
inside after Mason leaves it. He tries to use the
computer but it requires a login, so instead he
shuts off the power to the school right as
Mason has discovered the unconscious guard.
Some of the failed kids are freed from their
restraints and the guards try to regain control.
Laina escapes during the chaos, opening
the door with Miss Birch’s keycard.
Mason calls for Kellan’s dad, Victor Wood, to be
sent to the control room to fix the downed system.
The guards fetch him from the party, insisting
that it is just a minor power outage to the rest
of the guests. Mason then checks on the failed
kids, who are back under the guards’ control.
He asks if they’d done a headcount, and discovers
they hadn’t. They discover that Laina is missing.
A guard notices Laina trying to get out a
door, but she introduces herself as Miss
Birch and tells him that she’d called him when
she’d seen a student run down the stairwell.
Once he turns his back to her, she attacks. Blake
shows up and the two of them take the guard down.
Laina and Blake talk and Laina insists that she
couldn’t have failed the test. Blake amidst that
he failed on purpose, but that his dad got him
out. Laina realizes that something is off and
when Blake sets off an alarm they climb into a
vent to escape. Mason decides that the school will
stay in lockdown until the situation is resolved,
even as they surpass the time where parents were
expecting to see their children. He hears about
another guard who’d been attacked by someone who
claimed to be a teacher, so he calls for all
the teachers to be brought to a holding room.
Laina and Blake talk about Laina selling
cheats to desperate kids for the test.
Blake judges her for taking advantage of them
until she reveals that it was a desperate attempt
to pay for her mom’s treatments, which still
wasn’t enough. Blake apologizes for judging her.
They start heading towards the server room
through the vents. Governor Redding’s interview is
interrupted by news of the prolonged shutdown at
the school and the news anchor asks him about it.
The governor stumbles without any information,
but insists that things will be resolved soon.
Mason addresses the teachers and tells them to
present their IDs and keycards. The governor calls
him to get details about the situation and angrily
tells them to figure it out quickly. Blake and
Laina continue through the vents until Blake falls
through one and into a pool below. Laina jumps in
after him to save him and gets him to the edge
of the pool where she resuscitates him with CPR.
They get dry clothes from the lockers and change,
turning their backs to each other for privacy.
Laina finds another vent and they climb back in.
In the rec room, the students who passed begin
to get impatient with the guards and one of the
guards beats up a student. Kellan records it on
his phone and sends it to Wendy. Laina and
Blake reach the outside of the server room,
but the keycard falls out of Laina’s pocket. With
the keycard on the ground below the vent, they get
to a science classroom where Laina gets a magnet
to fish for the key. They make too much noise
and as a guard approaches, Laina is able to get
back into the vent while Blake stays in the room.
He tries to hide, but the guard catches
him. When Laina tries fishing for the key,
a guard notices and grabs it. But the guard turns
out to be Blake in a guard’s uniform. He tells
her that he’ll head towards the Thinning. In the
holding room, Miss Birch suggest to Mr. Glass that
they get a drink together and as they flirt she
steals his keycard. Miss Birch then shows Mason
her ID and Mr. Glass’s keycard to take suspicion
off of herself. When Mr. Glass doesn’t have his,
Mason thinks that he’s the traitor. Laina arrives
in the server room and finds a computer. She
tries to use her keycard, but it requires Mason’s
password. She messages Kellan to get his help only
to find out he’s offline. Kellan receives Laina’s
message right as his dad returns the power.
He sends her a video of Mason typing in his
password, allowing her to copy it and get in.
She checks Corinne’s test score first and is
relieved to see that she passed with an 86%.
Next, she checks hers, to find that she got a 98%
but still failed. Meanwhile, Wade had passed with
a 42%, and Blake passed with a 15%. She also
checks Ellie’s score and finds that she failed,
but got a score of 88%. She sees news coverage
of Governor Redding claiming that Laina,
after failing her test, had attacked several
guards, killing two of them, and escaped.
He places the blame for the shutdown on her.
Meanwhile, Wendy sees the video that Kellan
sent of the guard beating up a passing student
and she realises that what is happening doesn’t
match the official story. She responds to Kellan
and broadcasts the footage. When Laina realises
that Kellan sent out footage from within the
school she sends him images of the score.
Then, Mason and Victor spot her on the cameras and
she runs. Blake finds the Thinning and tries to
trick the guards into bringing the failed students
to the recreation hall, but they won’t accept
orders from anyone besides Mason so he tries
to fight the guards. Laina is caught by Mason,
insisting she has proof that she passed but he
sends her to the Thinning where she finds that
Blake has been subdued. Kellan receives Laina’s
proof of the test scores, both hers and Ellie’s
so he sends the images to Wendy. Wendy reports
on the documentation she’d received about the
falsified test scores. She reveals that Laina
failed despite having the highest score in the
school while Blake, son of the Governor, had
passed despite receiving the lowest score.
At the mansion, Vince insists that Governor
Redding has to shut this down and let Laina go,
but Redding insists there’s one more move. Mason
calls to ask for his approval to commence the
thinning, which he denies, saying that the list
needs to be revised. Once changes are made,
Laina is freed and told that she had
passed, she goes to Blake and kisses him.
She is then forced from the room and Blake is
forced into her chair. Wade is also taken to the
thinning. With varying levels of panic from the
kids, the guards approach and inject them. Blake
loses consciousness, and the school is taken out
of lockdown. Laina reunites with her little sister
outside, hugging her with tears in her eyes. She's
also joined by Miss Birch. Kellan hugs his dad,
both smiling and relieved. The parents whose
kids don’t return to them begin to mourn as
Wendy reports that Mason King has been taken in
for questioning regarding his involvement with the
altered test scores. Wendy’s report continues
that suspicions of Redding’s involvement were
discounted once it was discovered that his
son had been amongst the failed students.
Redding announces that he will help to investigate
the occurrences and continues by using Blake’s
failure to appeal to voters that he was just like
them. A large truck approaches a new facility.
The failed students, including Blake, are lowered
into the building by elevator. They find a factory
that builds the tablets the tests are taken on,
where previous failed students are put to work.